which is just how much we miss film.
And it's really, we also have a sense of discrepancy, too, I must say, but that's kind of something that I just want to acknowledge,
because it underlies the whole conversation in some fashion, that the sense that it's still very recently for most of us that he died,
and it's still kind of hard to believe that he's not around and that he can't just call him up or that he can't come to hear a Sachiko's concert or, you know, talk with me about these books coming out or anything else.
And I think in fact a small group of his friends are going to be getting together this weekend, and I know in Orange County that Tim Powers has this gang that he describes in the, in VALS, still meets basically every Thursday night.
And we all have a tremendous sense, as is, you know, in a sense kind of similar to what Angel expresses about her dead friend, so forth, in Timothy Archer.
The loss and also the kind of power of that friendship and relationship and the way that the feeling of missing film just doesn't go away.
Anyway, go ahead and talk about the benefit.
Wow, okay, just go, the engineer wants to say something.
We had the tape rolling during that, is that okay?
Yeah, that's fine.
Okay, fine.
Just want, just want you to know.
Yeah.
No, that's, well, there's not much I can say.
That's, that's all right.
Okay, back to the real world.
I understand that you named Divine Invasion Divine Invasion.
What was his original name and then how come it was necessary to rename it?
The original name is VALS Regained, VALS Regained, like Paradise Regained, which is a beautiful name.
I like the name VALS Regained.
It has certain problems from the publisher's point of view, which is that it was being published by different publishers than VALS.
It has none of the same characters and it's not set in the same world really as VALS.
It's not even the same kind of book so that anybody looking for another book like VALS, that was felt at the time, you know, would feel cheated by, you know, the title promising more VALS and then it being nothing like that.
And I think there was also a concern that VALS was this strange book that maybe nobody would like and what's the best mark to tie the next book to success to people's reaction to VALS, which hasn't come out yet.
Now as it turned out, VALS was a very big success quite unexpectedly even to the publisher.
They thought they were going to sell 15,000 and they sold 85,000 immediately and it was like 150,000 at this point, which is very, very good.
Anyway, funny call book VALS, 3Gain, that has none of the same characters, but on another level it's perfect because it is the sequel to the Paradise Lost, Paradise 3Gain, that's 2VALS.
I happen to be in the editor's office when a letter came from Phil, kind of half-heartedly offering alternate titles.
Most of them very silly and none of them that I could see anyway or I guess the editor could see that they had much chance of being a description of the book or in a pocket of title for the book but more like saying,
alright, you know, like my beautiful title one, I should call it, you know, Clackets Pot Boiler or something.
And so walking to Grand Central Station from David's office in Midtown Manhattan, I guess I thought about what would be a good title for the book.
And suddenly hit on the idea of the Divine Fish as somehow sounding science-fiction and also being an accurate description of the main event that happens in the novel.
And Phil didn't like the title at all at first. He ultimately came to love it, you know, a year later, virtually, and told me so.
But that was how it came to be. I mean, I happen to propose a possible name that happened to get accepted.
It was ironic though, stuff like this is always happening between me and Phil.
And it always seemed to work out nicely, which is like the Role of the Self piece, which is...
We're both really always glad that it worked out that way.
You know that David Hartwell and I originally published Confessions of the Craft Artists back in 1975.
Yeah, I'm a collector and I somehow missed out on that one. I had a chance to get it and for some reason I couldn't.
And I've regretted it ever since because I haven't found another copy yet.
Yeah, I guess there weren't that many of them. I'm really glad that it's now, you know, widely available.
And again, that was a gratification to Phil to know that that was coming.
And I have known a lot of people, I must say, who don't read science fiction, can't make head or tail science fiction,
who have read Confessions and become very excited about Phil as a writer.
You know they could read it because it's not science fiction. And then that would lead them into a set of quotes.
So I think that Confessions and the trans migration coming out may help a lot to introduce new readers who aren't science fiction readers
and, quote, have trouble with science fiction, you know, help introduce them to us.
And I think that's where, just as of course, the Blade Runner, helps introduce people to Phil's work, however, back at Lee,
because, you know, four or five, two thousand copies of Andrews have sold.
I'll ask one more question about Divine Invasion. I kind of sense that it's getting a little bit lost because
Vallas blew people away and then trans migration was his last book and it wasn't science fiction.
And I don't hear a lot about Divine Invasion. And to me, it's almost an amalgamation, a perfect amalgamation of his old Phil Dick
with the paranoia and his characters, the way he jumps between scenes, and then his newfound visions.
And to me, I almost enjoyed it as much as anything else I've ever read by him.
And I don't hear that much about it, either from critics or from friends either.
Yeah. I know many people who feel as you do, who care about the book very, very deeply.
And it's true that with some exceptions, there have been a few really wonderful reviews.
It hasn't gotten the attention that it really deserves.
But I suspect that will change over a period of time just because so many people have had the kind of powerful experience with the novel that you described.
It's certainly a shame that it doesn't have a Hugo or Nebula nomination.
But I don't think we'll get lost. I don't know yet, but I'm very hopeful that now that it's not paperback,
with the continuing growth and interest in Phil's work, that it may be very popular.
Again, it is some funny way of book that people who are not science fiction readers also can get into if they happen to follow across it.
Okay. Now for the obvious question about Blade Runner.
How did Android's Dream of Electric Sheep get picked up as a possible movie novel?
I know how the name got changed, that sort of thing, but was it picked up a long time ago or was it recently discovered?
It's a long, typical Hollywood story, which I know only pieces of.
The Sky Herb Jaffee who's been around MGM and the movie world for quite a while, I think.
I bought it at one point. I don't know that he was the first person to buy it, but he might have been.
His son wrote a screenplay which was like a comedy. It was ridiculous.
The guy came to visit Phil and Phil told him so.
And this was back in, you know, 73, 74.
But it was, Phil really wanted to see the movie made and it changed hands.
There's a description by that fellow at Hanson Adventure or whatever his name is who co-wrote the screenplay who had the option for a while of how he got involved in it and ultimately sold it to Ridley Scott.
So there's a description of that in an interview in Starlog, I think, in which sort of the authors of the screenplay answered what Phil Dick said about them in his interview on Starlog two months earlier,
except that they have to deal with the embarrassing fact that the man they're talking about is just that.
And it's a good time to spend their movie.
But what happened in any event has to do with somebody owning an option and it got turned into this and it got turned into that and somebody else bought the that and bought, you know, the option along with it and the that was turned into several different doses.
And it really, I'm sure, had zero to do with the novel androids for a while.
And then in later stages, more of the premises and sort of the scene of Phil's novel were added back in.
So that in my view, there's quite a bit of stuff in Playrunner.
But it's by some long serendipitous process that has much more to do with Hollywood than him.
And that as he said, you know, was very unexpected to him. He thought the movie absolutely awful.
And finally, I concur. I feel pretty much as most of the people I've spoken to and any reviews I've read that the movie is a failure because of the, you know, is a failure in at least many senses because of the hopelessness of the script and the woodenness of the delivery and just the fact that they concentrated so on the scene that they threw away the script.
And that's not just a story, but any story.
And that there's no, you know, believability there. And it's a shame because the setting that they created is so fantastic that they could have had a very powerful and very, very successful movie there if they had just been a little more conscious of making stories that people could get into and that would work to happen
within that setting. But I do want to see the movie again because Bill Dick wrote, you know, series of novels in the late 1960s, one of which is the do android stream of electric shape and this.
And then there's the classic pothealer and you big three-stripped auto-phomeral trips that now wait for last year and others that all depict a sort of extraordinary burned out urban future in which let's face it, it's just very hard to get out of bed in the morning.
And I have to deal with the fact that this is reality and which was always the kind of, you know, a description, a class of the contemporary world and a very brilliant one and that was uniquely filled with Dick and the scene that really has got created in Blade Runner with all the people who worked on the very special effects and so forth is very much that world that's setting.
That's what's really created uniquely in the novels and when he saw, you know, a minute and a half of tapes from Blade Runner on a news program like that, more than a year ago, just sitting alone in his apartment one day he had this extraordinary epiphany of realizing that that was the inside of his brain, you know, there on the TV set that had been put into this movie and it was just an absolutely extraordinary thing that had happened.
And even though it's frustrating that there's no damn story there and therefore there really isn't what you can call a good movie, the sad material, the portrayal of the background, the brilliant background of the film Dick World of the late 60s novels and certain of the situations, I mean Rachel is a perfect film Dick dark-haired girl.
And visually and you know in certain other ways the personality and the appearance is precisely the dark-haired girl who shows up and we can build you and androids and you know many of others those novels.
So again it's a extraordinary to go to this movie and see her there and it relates a lot to Bill's work. So it's just strange you know it's not a good movie and it's not satisfying and yet one can't help but feel fascinated by it and knows that it's somehow important.
Did he ever see it or see most of it?
He saw Rush's and he may have seen you know half a bit or more but I don't believe he ever saw a full film or you know even a full rough head as far as I know.
Do you know if any other of his novels have been picked up somewhere along the line maybe a movie someday?
Oh yes. There are two quite serious projects although you know Hollywood I don't know how serious they are this week as opposed to last week but two major projects that you know a lot of energy has gone into already and that are close to if not in production.
By major studios one is called Claw and it's from the novelette second variety that goes way back to 1954 and appeared in a collection called The Variable Man and it's a typical film set up where these killing machines have been created and new generations of killing machines that are more effective that just go out and seek out you know
killing flesh and cutting shreds and this future war you know has reached a point where to make things efficient the machines themselves turn out to be the next generation of machines and the machines start pretending to be people to entrap people you know as part of their hunting capabilities.
So it's a classic film you know paranoid horror story and it's being made by Capitol Pictures into a movie called Claw and the other major project that's going on is I don't know much about but Disney is at least heavily into pre-production on something called Total Recall which is the 1960s short story we can remember it for you wholesale.
Which appeared in many best of the air ontology so I think it's from fantasy and science fiction.
Which I want to attempt to give a plot stop so I'll be a segment read it recently enough but I think it involves a kind of standard filmmaking situation of kind of going you know reliving your memories in an artificial way and trying to figure out what is which of these adventures are really happening.
And there have been other books optioned at different times.
Jean Pierre, Go-Ran had wanted to goddard movie making partner for years very earnestly wanted to do UBIT and Phil wrote a screenplay for UBIT but nothing ever came of it but I certainly wouldn't be surprised to see that come up again.
I think that you'll see if we ever see some good nut movies made of Celtic's work there are lots of accounts from abroad and at one point there was French interest in doing confessions for craft artists and I think that would be extraordinary if that ever happened because he gets this French view of America in this novel about California in the 50s by a very American writer and it might be terrific.
I don't think that Hollywood is likely to do anything more meaningful to Celtic's work than the you know very expensive very bizarre fascinating and you know makes the motion kind of thing that they've done in play.
UBIT could make a hell of a movie I would think.
I guess it was in your farewell to him in Locust where there's this apocryphal story that he turned down 400,000 to write a novelization.
I applaud his doing that I think that's great but was he just in a financial position and felt a strong enough artistic sensibilities to turn that kind of money down?
I mean he didn't have 400,000 dollars but he had more money than he needed because he was a very modest man and all he really needed to do was fit in his apartment and help his friends and study theology and sometimes write and that was really what he was into.
You know I had a car and he didn't drive it so the principle really did matter to him a lot more and I'm not sure though that it would have been any different if he'd been starving.
I mean he and it wasn't that he just totally turned it down out of hand it just he and his agent both agreed that it just wasn't right you know as the situation developed.
The first situation to come about where his book androids couldn't be in print because that was what they wanted.
The androids had to be suppressed so the playrunner could come out and it was also impossible for him to write really a novelization of any movie no matter how good and certainly a screenplay that he thought was awful.
And it just developed into this situation where they were offering deals that they claim were worth 400,000 dollars literally pieces of this and shares in the marketing rights and so forth.
And where he could just stand there and say no you know what's going to happen is that you're going to put out androids and I'm going to get 25,000 dollars and a lot of the royalty.
And you're going to publish androids and that's it and ultimately of course that's what happened.
But they were very angry with him at the studio and fought it for a long time.
But it was just, I think for him it was a thrill and a privilege to get to make such a truly principled stand to such an outrageous degree.
He always knew what was right and what was right for his work and he cared.
Okay, two questions, maybe hard to answer, maybe easy to answer, okay.
If he had lived a ripe old age what would he have done? Where would he have gone in his writing?
If he had lived to a ripe old age I'm sure he would have kept writing and whatever he would have written would have been absolutely extraordinary.
But indeed there's no possible way to guess what it might have been.
I mean he was about to write a new novel.
At the time that he died he'd been thinking about it for quite some time.
He had a plot which probably would have been discarded and used as part of the basis for another one.
And he had a title, The Owl in Daylight and he'd written it two pages.
As far as I know that's probably it.
And that book was extremely ambitious.
What little I know about it.
And the character would have been modeled partly after himself and partly after Beethoven's birthday.
And it would have been a really challenging literary and imaginative and insincerational undertaking.
And I think that his enthusiasm for his work at the time that he's been working on these last three or four books
and the enthusiasm he continued to feel.
Guarantees that the next novels to come along would have been as extraordinary and probably as different as The Divine Invasion,
as Valence and Timothy Archer.
But more than that there's no way for anyone to imagine that he would have taken his themes to the next logical stage.
But operating under a logic that is his alone and that really died with him except that it lives in his many, many writings.
Unpublished, nonfiction writings as well as fiction.
There's still a logic that is unlike anything else in this universe but it could be remembered as a philosopher as much as a novelist.
Based on what he's already done and based on a lot of material that's never been published and that would probably be too difficult for all but a handful of people to read.
And he's still my piece, one of the most original and brilliant philosophers of the century.
Is that how you think he would want to be remembered as a philosopher more than as a writer?
No.
I mean I think it might have been able to be remembered as that also.
But no, certainly he was a novelist and a writer would be whatever that means would want to be remembered for that and for his work.
But certainly it would be extraordinarily gratifying to him if people discovered some of the other levels of his work as well.
I mean that is to say the among other things what's called the exegesis of which is the real and very earnest work which none of us have seen.
I mean anything like all of and I haven't seen that much of and I think it's challenging going and yet it's totally passionate and intense brilliant far reaching exploration of the nature of the universe.
Particularly from a philosophical theological point of view.
And I rather hope that some of that material will certainly that will be available in my great sense.
If it will someday be published in some form and I think that his letters to be published in letters are brilliant and incredibly funny.
I mean he's just got an amazing gift.
Funny as the Pistolary Writers ever and I think that that work will surface given time.
Just because of his quality.
Who has the power to or the ability to see that such things do come out eventually.
The power rests with his estate.
And his heirs one of his heirs is the administrator of the estate.
And that's ultimately where the power lies.
And I imagine you know that those agents would and should play an important role in suggesting what's best for his career as a writer.
But we'll really have to see what develops there.
I know there's a lot of interest in certain things and I feel confident that it will come about in time.
But what how sooner what will happen next is very very hard to say.
At least it is for me.
I don't know.
Thanks very much for spending the time with this.
Not only the physical time but the emotional time.
I'm sure this isn't a real easy thing to do even now.
And we appreciate getting your insight into Bill Dick.
It's a pleasure to know which I do know that there are so many people who really care about him and this work.
Are fascinated by it to the degree that that I am.
Great.
It's I still say whenever something appears about him in the Wall Street Journal and times have changed.
That's really something.
Okay.
I would love to see the change.